---
title: "Dennys_LQ"
author: "Yen-Hua Chen, Yizheng Wang, Ran Ji, Yimeng Jia"
output: html_document
---

### Task 1
#### get_lq.R
  
We use `get_lq.R` to get the webpages of each hotel and save them to `data/lq`. The webpages that we get contain the hotels in **Columbia**, **Honduras**, **USA**, **Mexico**, and **Canada**.

Since the for loop takes quite a while, we add another line to print(hotel_page) in each iteration to let Wercker know we are still working!


#### parse_lq.R

`parse_lq.R` is the main script that we construct the data frame.

After obataining webpages from the Internet, we catch some useful information. The following variables are the information that we provide: **location name**, **city**, **state**, **zipcode**, **address**, **phone**, **fax**, **number of rooms**, **latitude**, **longitude**, **number of floors**, **swimming pool**, **free Internet**, and **airport shuttle**.

Among above variables, **location name**, **number of rooms** and **numbere of floors** are easy to cobtain by using **Selector Gadget**.

For **city**, **state**, **zipcode** and **address**, we first obtain the variable **hotel information** which contains the basic information of the hotel including **address**, **phone** and **fax**. Then we use `str_split_fixed`, which will make the variables split **city**, **state**, **zipcode** and **address**, and store them separately. By separating those variables, we are able to calculate the distance between each hotel and denny's restaurant.

For **phone** and **fax**, we use the same approach as we got the **address**. The only difference is that we need to use `str_replace` to get rid of the characters in "Phone:" and "Fax:". We manually add **+** to **phone** variable since the variable **phone** will be used later to determine the nationality of the hotels.

For **latitude** and **longitude**, we use `str_match` to get the values, and then we store them as separate characters.

For **swimming pool**, **free Internet**, and **airport shuttle**, we first get the entire table and store the table as 1 character. By using this method, we can easily recognize whether or not the key words are contained in the amenities table with `str_detect`.

After catching the necessary information, we can construct the data frame **hotels**.

Since for task 1, we only need information in **US**, **Mexico**, and **Canada**, we should first exclude the two countries **Columbia** and **Honduras**. As we know the country phone codes for **Columbia** and **Honduras** are **+57** and **+504** respectly, we can use **phone** as the indicator. We use `str_detect` to detect whether or not the phone number of the hotel begins with those particular numbers and characters.

Then we create a new variable called country to indicate the location country of the hotels, because we only need to compare the distances between the hotels and the denny's restaurants within the US,  We use **zipcode** and **phone** as indicators to distinguish the countries . We  apply `as.numeric` to **zipcode** and `str_detect` to **phone**. **US** has the phone numbers begin with **+1** and **zipcode** in numeric type. **Mexico** does not have the phone numbers begins with **+1** but has **zipcode** in numeric type. **Canada** has non-numeric **zipcode**, and hence will produce NAs, and return TRUE in `if` condition when the function `as.numeric` is applied.

The final **hotels** data frame is saved as `data/lq.Rdata`.

### Task 2
The goal of this task is to find some basic informatin of all the dennys' stores in the state. Those information, such as longitude and latitude, would be used to do some further analysis. Hence, grabbing all the information from Dennys' official website is the most significant part in this task. Whenever you type in the place you are interested, the default search url only return a few of results in the region where the center is the place user entered and 10 to 100 miles as radius. If we would like to make this process more efficiency, we could change some parameters in the url after figuring out the pattern of structure of the searching url. 

Each time I change the **zip code**(center), **the number of returning results** and **searching radius**, I would have different search url. Basically, as long as I have enough point and large enough radius,I am able to cover all the dennys' store in the US. 

This task would contain two different R files: `get_dennys.R`, which is used to get search urls, and `parse_dennys.R`, which is used to extract the desired information from those search urls. In order to cover all the denny's store, we choose three cities (New York, Salt Lake, Orlando) in the mainland US, plus Hawaii and Alaska, with 5000 miles searching radius each. In total, we would have 5 search urls with 1000 dennys' stores infomation in each of them. 

Since the search urls give those information with the html format, we need to extract **address**, **city**, **state**, **zipCode**, **country**, **longitude**, **attitude** and **phone** for each dennys' store from parse_dennys.R extract, and save them in a dataframe. There are 1610 Dennys' stores in the united state.


### Task 3

The goal of this task is to verify the Mitch Hedberg's joke with the info of dennys and La Quinta around the United State we just extracted from task 1 and task 2. We have 1610 dennys' stores and 890 La Quinta in total across the US. We guess there woule be several dennys around one La Quinta. In order to analyze the veracity of Hedberg's claim, we calculate the distance beteen each La Quinta to dennys, and find the number of dennys around La Quinta within certain distance, say, 1 mile. It turns out there are 234/890 La Quintas have at least one dennys store around within 1 mile. Hedberg' claim is likely to be true.


```{r}
library(methods)
library(magrittr)
library(dplyr)
```

```{r}
load("data/dennys.Rdata")
load("data/lq.Rdata")
# take a look at the data frames we created in the previous tasks
hotels
dennys
```


#### Distance between La Quinta and Denny’s in US

We first obtain the subset of hotels data which contains only hotels in the States. Then we construct new data frames `df.la` and `df.dn` which contains only latitude and longitude data of hotels and dennys.

Second, we write a function to calculate the distance between 2 spatial locations on a sphere with the following formula from Google (Reference: http://www.movable-type.co.uk/scripts/latlong.html): 

$d = R\times c$, $c = 2\text{atan2}(\sqrt{a},\sqrt{1-a})$ and $a = \text{sin}^{2}\frac{\Delta\phi\cdot f}{2}+(\text{cos}\phi_{1}\cdot f)\times(\text{cos}\phi_{2}\cdot f)\times\text{sin}^{2}\frac{\Delta\rho\cdot f}{2}$ where $R$ is the radius of earth, $f$ converts the degree to radian, $\Delta\phi=\phi_{2}-\phi_{1}$, $\Delta\rho=\rho_{2}-\rho_{1}$ and $\phi$ denotes latitude and $\rho$ denotes logitude.

Third, we use each hotel as the center and calculate the restaurants which locate within 1 mile from it. To carry out this process, We construct a for loop to calculate the distance between each La Quinta to the denny's and report the total number of denny's which are nearby the hotel in the matrix `result`.

```{r}
# Obtain hotels which locates in the States
sub_hotels = hotels[which(hotels$country == "US"), ]
# Get latitude and longitude data from hotels and dennys
df.lq = matrix(as.numeric(c(sub_hotels$lat, sub_hotels$long)), ncol = 2)
df.dn = matrix(as.numeric(c(dennys$latitude, dennys$longitude)), ncol = 2)
# Function which calculates distance between 2 locations
f = pi/180 # Need to convert degree to radian
R = 3961 # Radius of earth
calDistance = function(lat1, lon1, positionVector, distance ) {
  dlon = positionVector[, 2] - lon1
  dlat = positionVector[, 1] - lat1
  a = (sin(dlat*f/2))^2 + cos(lat1*f) * cos(positionVector[, 1]*f) * (sin(dlon*f/2))^2 
  c = 2 * atan2(sqrt(a), sqrt(1-a)) 
  d = R * c
  Num = length(which(d <= distance))
  return(Num) 
  # Report how many restaurants are near specific hotel
}
```

```{r}
# Construct matrix records the results
result = matrix(NA, nrow = nrow(sub_hotels), ncol = 1)
for (i in 1:nrow(sub_hotels)) {
  result[i,] = calDistance(df.lq[i, 1], df.lq[i, 2], df.dn,1)
}
```

To present our result, we first combine `result` which contains the number of denny's around La Quinta to the data frame `sub_hotels`, and select the La Quinta's which have at least one denny's nearby. Then we draw a mixture plot of bars and points. The bar plots show the total number of La Quinta's that have denny's around within certain miles for each state. The points represent the total number of denny's located within that particular distance around the La Quinta in the corresponding state.

```{r}
# Bar plot of the number of hotels which have dennys nearby within 1 mile 
# and the number of dennys near the hotels by state
library(ggplot2)
combo = data.frame(sub_hotels[which(result != 0), ], dennys = result[which(result != 0), ])
combo = combo[order(combo$state), ]
total = data.frame(group_by(combo, state) %>%
                      summarise(sum(dennys), length(state))) %>%
                      setNames(c("state", "n_dennys", "n_lq"))
ggplot(data = total, aes(x = state, y = n_lq, fill = state)) +
  geom_bar(stat="identity") +
  geom_point(aes(x = state, y = n_dennys)) +
  theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 90, hjust = 1), legend.position = "none") +
  ylab("Number") +
  labs(title = "Number of hotels with dennys in 1 mile (bar) \n Number of dennys near the hotel in 1 mile (point)")
```

To see how this result varies with respect to the choices of distance thresholds, we draw another plot to compare the proportion of La Quinta with at least one dennys' around within 5 different distances: 0.0625, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 1.5 miles.

When distance is 0.0625 miles, the one used by Mitch Hedburg, we also get the same result -- 3%. However, if we increase the distance to 1.5 miles, the proportion raises to 30%, which is fairly large. Since the driving time for 1.5 miles is about 1.5-2 minutes (assuming the speed is 60 mile/hr and considering the traffic), the joke really reflects the truth.

```{r}
#Candidate distance value
distanceValue = c(0.0625, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 1.5)
#this is used to save the number of lq that has dennys around
finalResult = c()
for (num in distanceValue) {# go over each value
  result2 = matrix(NA, nrow = nrow(sub_hotels), ncol=1)
  for (i in 1:nrow(sub_hotels)) {
    result2[i,] = calDistance(df.lq[i, 1], df.lq[i, 2], df.dn, num)
  }
  finalResult=c(finalResult,length(which(result2!=0))) #return the number of lq that has at least one dennys around
}

combo2 = cbind(as.character(distanceValue), round(finalResult/length(result2), digits = 2)) %>% data.frame() %>% setNames(c("d", "r"))
         
# Plot
ggplot(data = combo2, aes(x = d, y = r, fill = d)) +
  geom_bar(stat = "identity") +
  xlab("Distance (mile)") +
  ylab("proportion") +
  theme(legend.position = "none") +
  labs(title = "Proportion of La Quinta's with dennys nearby \n (Total number of LQ = 890)")
```
